Memoirs of a Revolutionist: Part Third, Section VIIThis text was taken from the 
1st edition of Memoirs of a Revolutionist, Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston and 
New York, 1899.


VII
As there was nothing more to be done in the direction of reform, I tried to do 
what seemed to be possible under the existing circumstances, -- only to become 
convinced of the absolute uselessness of such efforts. In my new capacity of 
attach¨¦ to the governor-general for Cossack affairs, I made, for instance, a 
most thorough investigation of the economical conditions of the Usur¨ª Cossacks, 
whose crops used to be lost every year, so that the government had every winter 
to feed them in order to save them from famine. When I returned from Usur¨ª with 
my report, I received congratulations on all sides, I was promoted, I got 
special rewards. All the measures I recommended were accepted, and special 
grants of money were given for aiding the emigration of some and for supplying 
cattle to others, as I had suggested. But the practical realization of the 
measures went into the hands of some old drunkard, who would squander the money 
and pitilessly flog the unfortunate Cossacks for the purpose of converting them 
into good agriculuralists. And thus it went on in all directions, beginning with 
the Winter Palace at St Petersburg, and ending with the Usur¨ª and Kamch¨¢tka. 
The higher administration of Siberia was influenced by excellent intentions, and 
I can only repeat that, everything considered, it was far better, far more 
enlightened, and far more interested in the welfare of the country than the 
administration of any other province of Russia. But it was an administration, -- 
a branch of the tree which had its root at St Petersburg, and that was quite 
sufficient to paralyze all its excellent intentions, and to make it interfere 
with all beginnings of local spontaneous life and progress. Whatever was started 
for the good of the country by local men was looked at with distrust, and was 
immediately paralyzed by hosts of difficulties which came, not so much from the 
bad intentions of men, -- men, as a rule, are better than institutions, -- but 
simply because they belonged to a pyramidal, centralized administration. The 
very fact of its being a government which had its source in a distant capital 
caused it to look upon everything from the point of view of a functionary of the 
government who thinks, first of all, about what his superiors will say, and how 
this or that will appear in the administrative machinery, and not of the 
interests of the country. 
Gradually I turned my energy more and more toward scientific exploration. In 
1865 I explored the western Say¨¢ns, where I got a new glimpse into the structure 
of the Siberian highlands, and came upon another important volcanic region on 
the Chinese frontier; and finally, next year, I undertook a long journey to 
discover a direct communication between the gold mines of the Yak¨²tsk province 
(on the Vi¨ªm and the Ol¨®kma) and Transbaik¨¢lia. For several years (1860-64) the 
members of the Siberian expedition had tried to find such a passage, and had 
endeavored to cross the series of very wild stony parallel ridges which separate 
these mines from Transbaik¨¢lia; but when they reached that region, coming from 
the south, and saw before them these dreary mountains spreading for hundreds of 
miles northward, all of them, save one who was killed by natives, returned 
southward. It was evident that, in order to be successful, the expedition must 
move from the north to the south, -- from the dreary and unknown wilderness to 
the warmer and populated regions. It also happened that while I was preparing 
for the expedition, I was shown a map which a native had traced with his knife 
on a piece of bark. This little map -- splendid example, by the way, of the 
usefulness of the geometrical sense in the lowest stages of civilization, and 
one which would consequently interest A R Wallace - so struck me by its seeming 
truth to nature that I fully trusted to it, and began my journey, following the 
indications of the map. In company with a young and promising naturalist, 
Polak¨®ff, and a topographer, I went first down the L¨¦na to the northern gold 
mines. There we equipped our expedition, taking provisions for three months, and 
started southward. An old Yak¨²t hunter, who twenty years before had once 
followed the passage indicated on the Tungus map, undertook to act for us as 
guide, and to cross the mountain region, -- full 250 miles wide, -- following 
the river valleys and gorges indicated by the knife of the Tungus on the 
birch-bark map. He really accomplished this wonderful feat, although there was 
no track of any sort to follow, and all the valleys that one sees from the top 
of a mountain pass, all equally filled with woods, seem, to the unpracticed eye, 
to be absolutely alike. 
This time the passage was found. For three months we wandered in the almost 
totally uninhabited mountain deserts and over the marshy plateau, till at last 
we reached our destination, Chit¨¢. I am told that this passage is now of value 
for bringing cattle from the south to the gold mines; as for me, the journey 
helped me immensely afterward in finding the key to the structure of the 
mountains and plateaus of Siberia, -- but I am not writing a book of travel, and 
must stop. 
The years that I spent in Siberia taught me many lessons which I could hardly 
have learned elsewhere. I soon realized the absolute impossibility of doing 
anything really useful for the mass of the people by means of the administrative 
machinery. With this illusion I parted forever. Then I began to understand not 
only men and human character, but also the inner springs of the life of human 
society. The constructive work of the unknown masses, which so seldom finds any 
mention in books, and the importance of that constructive work in the growth of 
forms of society, fully appeared before my eyes. To witness, for instance, the 
ways in which the communities of Dukhob¨®rtsy (brothers of those who are now 
going to settle in Canada, and who find such a hearty support in the United 
States) migrated to the Am&uaucte;r region, to see the immense advantages which 
they got from their semi-communistic brotherly organization, and to realize what 
a wonderful success their colonization was, amidst all the failures of state 
colonization, was learning something which cannot be learned from books. Again, 
to live with natives, to see at work all the complex forms of social 
organization which they have elaborated far away from the influence of any 
civilization, was, as it were, to store up floods of light which illuminated my 
subsequent reading. The part which the unknown masses play in the accomplishment 
of all important historical events, and even in war, became evident to me from 
direct observation, and I came to hold ideas similar to those which Tolstoy 
expresses concerning the leaders and the masses in his monumental work, "War and 
Peace." 
Having been brought up in a serf-owner's family, I entered active life, like all 
young men of my time, with a great deal of confidence in the necessity of 
commanding, ordering, scolding, punishing, and the like. But when, at an early 
stage, I had to manage serious enterprises and to deal with men, and when each 
mistake would lead at once to heavy consequences, I began to appreciate the 
difference between acting on the principle of command and discipline and acting 
on the principle of common understanding. The former works admirably in a 
military parade, but it is worth nothing where real life is concerned, and the 
aim can be achieved only through the severe effort of many converging wills. 
Although I did not then formulate my observations in terms borrowed from party 
struggles, I may say now that I lost in Siberia whatever faith in state 
discipline I had cherished before. I was prepared to become an anarchist. 
From the age of nineteen to twenty-five I had to work out important schemes of 
reform, to deal with hundreds of men on the Am¨²r, to prepare and to make risky 
expeditions with ridiculously small means, and so on; and if all these things 
ended more or less successfully, I account for it only by the fact that I soon 
understood that in serious work commanding and discipline are of little avail. 
Men of initiative are required everywhere; but once the impulse has been given, 
the enterprise must be conducted, especially in Russia, not in military fashion, 
but in a sort of communal way, by means of common understanding. I wished that 
all framers of plans of state discipline could pass through the school of real 
life before they begin to frame their state Utopias. We should then hear far 
less than at present of schemes of military and pyramidal organization of 
society. 
With all that, life in Siberia became less and less attractive to me, although 
my brother had joined me in 1864 at Irk¨²tsk, where he commanded a squadron of 
Cossacks. We were happy to be together; we read a great deal, and discussed all 
the philosophical, scientific, and intellectual life, and there was none in 
Siberia. The occasional passage through Irk¨²tsk of Raphael Pumpelly or of Adolph 
Bastian - the only two men of science who visited our capital during my stay 
there - was quite an event for both of us. The scientific and especially the 
political life of Western Europe, of which we heard through the papers, 
attracted us, and the return to Russia was the subject to which we continually 
came back in our conversations. Finally, the insurrection of the Polish exiles 
in 1866 opened our eyes to the false position we both occupied as officers of 
the Russian army. 

 
Go to Part Third, Section VIII
Return to Contents
Return to Anarchist Archives
